Good afternoon.
It's the last session of the day.
I hope we all still have a lot of energy,
because we have a tremendous
amount of information to show you,
a great presentation.
And without further ado,
I think we'll just roll right in.
Robert Bowdidge,
our Performance Tools guru.
Thanks, Godfrey.
Hi, my name is Robert Bowdidge
and I'm a member of Apple's
Developer Tools group where I'm
responsible for the performance tools.
What I'd like to do today is tell you
something about the tools and give
you a quick introduction to them.
Now, why are we giving this talk?
Now, I'm sure all of you have great apps
that you're ready to ship at Macworld
New York in just about two months.
And hopefully they're all
pretty much feature complete,
right?
Thank you.
So that means that you've got
about two months to go and you
should probably be concerned a
little about now about whether your
applications actually perform as well
as you want them to be performing.
And more importantly that they're
performing well enough so that your
customers also think they're good.
and therefore hopefully you're going
to start using the performance tools
to actually track down performance
problems and make your apps as
good as they possibly can be.
What I'll do is I'll
show you those tools.
So what you should hopefully
learn today is first of all,
you should find out that we actually
do have some cool tools available.
Secondly, you should get some,
you are going to see me go through
a sample program and actually
find some performance bugs in it.
So we're going to do
some real world examples.
and hopefully you can take that
home and get so excited about these
tools that you're actually going
to go in and dive through them.
I'm not going to do a tutorial,
I'm not going to go through in detail of,
well you pull down this menu
and you press that button
and this is what it shows.
I'm really going to show you what you can
gain out of these in hopes of exciting
you enough that you're actually going
to go off and play with these yourself.
Hopefully some of you will be
playing with them as I speak.
If you've got questions
about the frameworks,
about what you should be
doing in your Carbon programs
to make them more efficient,
I am not going to answer
those sorts of questions.
I am not the right person to
answer those and I would probably
be telling you the wrong stuff.
In those cases,
you want to go to the framework
talks or look at them on DVD.
So for example,
the Carbon talk that was at
1:00 was absolutely--or 2:00
was absolutely wonderful.
Go take a look at that
if you write Carbon apps.
The Java talk was really good
about Java performance as well.
So, just a quick summary.
So what are the possible
causes of poor performance?
On a Mac OS X system,
one of the most obvious is
excessive use of memory.
That is that your application
requires a working set of memory
that is more than it really needs.
Now this can be because you have a
lot of code because of dead code or
stuff that isn't really necessary.
It could be because you're allocating
too much memory via malloc.
It could be because you're
mapping in shared files,
that sort of thing.
There's many ways that you can
increase your memory footprint.
A second way that you could be
affecting performance is if your
application is causing too much,
is basically using the CPU too much,
executing too much code.
A third way is that you might
not actually be doing anything.
You may be waiting for
something to happen,
such as going off on the
network or going out to disk.
So we have both the case of doing
too much and doing too little.
And finally, there may be cases where in
graphical application you may
be doing too much drawing,
and therefore you're doing
too much computation,
you're using memory,
you're talking with the window manager,
and everything slows down.
Almost all of these problems eventually
turn into memory problems on Mac OS X,
because all of them have some connection
with how much memory is in the system
and what memory is being touched.
And the problem is that as soon as the
memory footprint of your application and
of the rest of the system becomes larger
than you actually have physical memory,
we have this wonderful
thing called virtual memory.
And it just sort of
gives you extra memory.
And to get around that,
it basically takes some of the memory out
of memory and it writes it out to disk.
And then it takes some other and takes
it off of disk and puts it into memory.
And the problem is as
soon as this happens,
suddenly your application is going
to be judged by the speed of the disk
and not by the speed of the processor.
So,
anything you can do to cut memory use,
to keep your working set
as small as possible,
is a great thing.
Okay, so here's a quick summary of the
tools that are available with
three categories that may or
may not be the most meaningful,
but they seem to work.
The first one is execution behavior.
We have tools that help you
understand what code is executing.
This includes tools such
as Sampler and Sample.
The second set of tools we have
are for understanding heap use,
for understanding how much memory
you explicitly ask for during
the running of your program.
These include tools such as malloc-debug,
object-alloc,
which is a tool for understanding
Objective C and core foundation use,
and the command line tools heap, leaks,
and malloc-history.
malloc-history is particularly cool
because you can actually tell it,
"Hey, in this process I've got a buffer
that starts at this address.
Where did I allocate that?"
And it'll actually tell you.
It'll give you a call stack
saying where that came from.
Finally, there's a set that I call system
state because I don't have a
better way to describe them.
These include tools for
helping you do drawings,
such as quartz-debug.
It includes tools for understanding
how you use system calls,
such as SC usage or file system calls,
which is FS usage,
as well as programs like top,
which gives you sort of an overall
state of the program--of the machine.
VM map,
which will tell you how virtual memory
is laid out for a specific process.
Okay, so how are we actually going to
look at the performance tools?
What we're going to do is, well,
we're going to do public embarrassment.
We are going to rip apart
one of my own programs,
a little test app that I've been
working on called Thread Viewer,
and we are going to see if we
can find any performance problems
that either I put in or that
linger from code that I borrowed.
Okay.
Scott, do you want to come up here
and show Thread Viewer?
Now, the important things to know
about Thread Viewer is that,
first of all, it's a small Carbon app.
or excuse me,
it's a small Cocoa application intended
for helping us do performance analysis.
Actually, we need to go to demo two.
Oh, we are on demo two.
and what we can do with thread
viewer is as Scott just did we can
say hey I want to look at a specific
process in this case the doc and
what it does is it shows us a running
timeline showing us what's happening
with specific threads in that task.
So for example we can see here
that doc uses two threads.
The one on the bottom is the main thread,
the one above is a secondary thread
that's helping do computations.
Now the little blocks there
represent 50 millisecond intervals
in the life of that process.
The green represents that the,
that doc was running during that,
when it was examined.
The yellow indicates that it had been
running in the last 50 milliseconds
but it wasn't currently running.
The gray indicates that it's blocking,
it's waiting for something to happen.
The light green and light red are,
are waits also.
The green means that it's
waiting in the run loop,
waiting for something
interesting to happen.
The red indicates that the
program was waiting on a lock.
Now exactly what thread viewer is this?
What you does doesn't really matter
except to understand the pretty colors.
The important thing to see is that this
is a somewhat realistic program and that
you can use it to examine other programs.
So, was there anything else
I wanted to say on that?
Ah, yes.
So, what's wrong with this?
Any comments?
Does anyone see anything that looks
obviously wrong with this program?
There's a lot of green.
Non-green.
Oh, non-green.
Actually, I was hoping on Thread Viewer,
but that's an interesting thing that
the doc is actually doing a fair amount,
but that's mostly because
Scott's playing with it.
However, with Thread Viewer,
hopefully there's nothing that you see
here that makes Thread Viewer look bad.
And that's the first lesson
I want you to take home tonight,
which is that usually if you
just go and look at a program,
you're not going to be able to
tell that there's necessarily
any performance problems.
In order to understand performance,
you need to do measurement.
You need to do software metrics.
You actually need to look at the
program and measure things like how
much memory it's using and measuring
how much time it takes to do things.
You need this for two reasons.
The first one is so that you can actually
look at it and say whether those numbers
actually match your expectations.
Did I really expect it to take
two seconds to load that web page?
The second thing is that when that
system or as the system changes,
you want to be able to note regressions.
And unless you wrote down
how it behaved two weeks ago,
you won't actually notice
that you've been losing 5%
performance every single time.
Thus, you need to write stuff down.
And in fact,
for the projects that I work on,
the ones that are
relatively time critical,
I actually have a checklist of things
that I measure and I write them down
and just stick them in a folder.
It's low tech, but it works.
So we don't know how the system
performs and we'd like to find that out.
What we can do is we can start
by looking at overall system
behavior and we'll start by
running a text utility called top.
Now what you see on top here is
at the very top of the screen you
see information about the system.
The information below
represents individual lines
referring to a single process.
So some of the things that we want to
look at is-- or some of the things that
I find very important or interesting
that you should probably look at is,
first of all, the page in and page out
rates at the very top.
So what the line that says page ins,
page outs is showing us is
it's telling us something about
the virtual memory system.
Specifically,
that line alone is telling us
how many pages the virtual memory
system is writing out to disk
and how many it's bringing in.
The first number represents the
number of pages that have been
moved since the system was rebooted.
The number in parentheses represents
the number of pages that have been paged
in or paged out in the last second.
The important number is the
one in parentheses for me.
What I tend to say is that
you should look at that,
you should look at top every now
and then when your system's running.
If you ever see those numbers go
above zero for any length of time,
you know, if they stay at 20 or at 50,
that usually means that
you're paging a lot.
It usually means that the amount of
physical memory you have is not enough
for all the things you're running,
which may indicate that your
app is taking up too much memory
or that something else is.
Now if you're hitting 50 or 100,
then basically your system is thrashing.
It's spending all of its time
throwing pages out to disk
and bringing them back in.
And at some point around 50 or 100,
you're going to be hitting the limits of
the disk that it can't page any faster.
And so if you ever see
anything at that level,
that means that your
system is really hosed.
Oh, that's a technical term.
The other thing that's
interesting is on the bottom part.
You can see that in
the list of processes,
there's a column that says percent CPU,
which says which tasks are
actually spending the time running.
And we can see here that ThreadViewer
is responsible for 3% or 4% of the CPU.
So it's not taking up a lot of CPU time.
We can also see a column far
to the right that says RPRVT.
That's the other one that I think is
interesting that you should look at.
RPRVT stands for Resident Private Memory.
It's telling how much memory is in
physical memory on the computer.
and it's telling you how much is actually
private to that application alone.
And this number tends to be a good
measure of how much memory your
application needs in order to run.
So go look at that number when
you want to get a rough footprint.
Now notice if you have a
lot of things in memory,
there could be a lot of memory paged out,
sitting out on disk.
And in that case,
it would not be resident.
So on a heavily loaded system,
that number may not make as much sense.
Now, one thing we should do is
let's show another mode of Top.
Top has a huge number of modes.
And in fact,
this is probably as good a time
as any to try to sell books.
There is a book called
Inside Mac OS X Performance.
It's available, I believe,
on the CD that you got in your bags.
It's available on the web.
And it's available from Fatbrain,
nicely bound like this.
And it describes a lot
of the performance tools.
And it,
along with the various manuals for Top,
will tell you what some of the flags are.
What I'm going to do is I'm
going to show you-- or Scott's
already going to show you--
A option to top, the top-d option,
extremely clear and
extremely user friendly,
which gives us a few other
pieces of information.
We can see the number of page faults.
The two I'm going to point at is CSW,
which is the number of context switches,
way to the right.
and messages sent, messages received.
That's how many Mach messages are
getting sent around in the system.
How many have to be received.
Now, there's a reason why
I'm telling you this.
If Scott actually plays
around with Thread Viewer,
I guess it is kind of,
what we see is that the
number of context switches,
that is the number of times
that something got paged out so
that something else could run,
is pretty high for both the window
manager and for Thread Viewer.
And the number of messages sent
and received is relatively high.
Does Does anyone know
why that's happening?
Yes, I heard it.
What's happening is that
Thread Viewer is drawing,
and the drawing is not just
done by the Thread Viewer.
It's actually done by Thread
Viewer and Window Manager together.
And so at times when the
Thread Viewer is doing drawing,
it actually has to communicate
with the Window Manager.
So this is the second
take home lesson today,
which is that sometimes the program that
you're running can't be measured just
by looking at that program in isolation.
You actually have to look at
daemons and servers that might
also be doing computation.
In the case of drawing,
you want to take a look at the window
manager and at your application.
There have been times where I've
seen an application that looked
like it was performing great.
It's only taking 30 percent of
the CPU doing a lot of drawing.
But the window manager was responsible
for 60 percent of the drawing.
And so to understand overall problems,
you want to look at both.
So, Scott,
I actually saw something kind of
interesting in that last top display.
Can you switch back to it?
Okay,
so does anyone see anything interesting
in this display for Thread Viewer?
Well, we don't know that it's leaking.
What we see is it looks like--
Maybe there's a reason
why we're doing that.
Maybe it's intentional,
but we're seeing the amount of
resident private memory growing.
At least I think it's growing,
but luckily top has this little
plus there and it actually
says how much memory is going.
So it seems to be going up and
it's using 37 megabytes of memory.
Hmm, this looks suspicious.
Let's see if we can
track down that problem.
So one thing I can try to do is I can
try to prove that it's actually growing.
Yes, I know that seems kind of silly,
but let's try it anyway.
So what I want to do is I want
to see if I can actually
prove that it's increasing.
I want to identify a trend over time.
Now one of the problems is I don't
really have a tool for this.
Okay, I'm not doing my job.
However, I can show you how you
can make a tool like this.
What Scott can do is because
top is a command line tool,
because it's a Unix non-Mac like tool,
that means that you can actually
use the various features of
Unix to basically roll your own.
So what Scott has done here is he
has typed in a little shell script.
While one, call top with the -l option,
which is basically a one shot,
give me the data, and grep,
which is a search for the
line that starts with thread,
and print that out.
Then sleep for a second and keep looping.
And if Scott runs that,
what we start getting is we
get the top data only grabbing
the line for thread viewer.
Okay, so, and we can see here that the
amount of resident private memory,
which is the last column visible on
where thread viewer is obscuring things,
is actually growing.
So, geez, I've got a memory leak.
So what you should take out of
this is that command line tools,
regardless of how Mac-like,
Mac-unlike they may be, still have uses.
You can use them to roll your own tools.
You can run them via telnet from
another machine if you want to
inspect somebody else's machine.
And you can run them even when the
window manager is not responding,
or when you've got full screen
because you're debugging a game.
So don't ignore the command line tools.
They do have a place.
Okay, so what are the possible
causes for the memory leak?
One possibility is we're
not throwing away old data.
Any other suggestions?
History.
History?
Actually, that's a good one.
Well, I'm not quite sure actually,
so let's see if we can track it down.
One thing I'm going to do is I'm going
to try another command line tool.
It's called Heap.
Actually, Scott can try running it,
but the slide actually has the output.
Heap is a tool that's intended
to give you a dump of how much
memory you're using via malloc.
and the important,
most of it actually is just saying,
oh here are all the
buffers you're allocating.
The important part is
the very top though.
Because one possibility,
although a relatively unlikely one,
is that we could have
fragmentation of our heap.
You know,
we could allocate a million bytes
and then free it and then allocate
ten bytes that fills that space and
keep going so that the amount of heap
space keeps growing even though we're
not actually using a lot of memory.
What we can do with heap is we
can look and we can see that
there's actually two heaps,
what we call zones,
one for core graphics and one
for the default malloc zone,
that represent about, say,
2.3 megabytes of memory.
We can see that from the
overall allocation part.
We also see that the total
number of nodes malloc,
the amount of space we're actually using,
is about two megabytes.
Okay, so 2.3 minus two megabytes is about
300,000 bytes of unallocated memory.
This indicates that heap
fragmentation is not our problem.
Okay, so this means it's memory
we're actually allocating.
So,
another thing that we could do Thank you.
is we have two megabytes
of memory that's allocated.
Our virtual memory size is--our
resident private size was 38 megabytes.
Okay, that leaves 36 megabytes we don't
know where it's coming from.
So what we can do is we
can run another tool.
This one's called VM Map.
And what it does is it gives us
information on how our virtual
memory system is laid out.
Most of the time this isn't
something you really care about,
but every now and then it
might actually be interesting.
And if Scott runs it,
Oh yes, you've got to run that.
Basically what it'll do is it'll say,
okay, there's a page at address zero,
it's 4,000 bytes and it's
basically unreadable.
There's a page at 4,096 and
it has the executable and it
runs for 14k or something.
And there is the dump.
Very friendly.
However,
it's got some interesting information.
And if you ever wondered about how the
application was laid out in memory,
this is how you'd find it out.
So that when you're looking
in the debugger and you find
yourself at address 1016,
you can find out why you might be there.
However,
the slide actually shows you a little
more detail about what's actually there.
In this case,
we see that there's a malloc
buffer at address 139A000,
and there's about 16,000 bytes.
So that's space for the heap.
A couple others.
And then below the 512,000
bytes allocated for one of the
stacks for one of the threads,
we see address 14B6000, 4,000 bytes.
146D, 4,000 bytes.
146F000, 4,000 bytes.
This may be the source of our leak.
See where it says 4K on the slide here?
Sorry, actually this is a good reason
why I shouldn't have done this.
So over on the slide you can see
the 146d 4000 bytes read/write.
So the interesting thing is we keep
allocating these 4,000 byte buffers.
This is kind of odd.
And that would have been
allocated via VM allocate.
That was how you'd actually
create a virtual memory page.
And I went in when I found this problem
and went into the debugger and said,
what do I see there?
And what I did, if you can,
can you bring up thread viewer?
Is I found that basically
that page was zero,
that virtual memory space was zero,
except that there were a couple
numbers that looked oddly like those
thread IDs to the left hand side,
the 5A035903.
which made me think, oh,
this may have something to do with, like,
you know, a system buffer or something.
And it turns out that what's
actually happening here is that
the Mach APIs sometimes will
return you basically a buffer.
It'll return you a VM allocated
page that you actually have to free.
And the code,
which is actually in one of the
libraries that ThreadViewer depends on,
does something like, hey,
tell me all the threads that
are associated with this task,
and you get a buffer back
that contains it all.
And you need to make sure to free it,
but that yellow line wasn't there.
and by adding that line we
got rid of the memory leak.
Now this is not a case
you will ever run into.
None of you will ever, ever,
ever hopefully use the Mach calls
to find out what threads exist.
This is something I'm doing
as a performance tool.
However,
what you should take out of this is
first of all I had to use multiple
tools to track this down and I had
to compare their output to actually
figure out what the problem is.
This is one of the problems
with performance that usually
the tools aren't just going to
drop an answer out in your hand.
Plan on inspecting things and
thinking about them to actually
find out what the causes are.
[Transcript missing]
Now, we saw that we were using about 2.3
megabytes of memory in the heap.
That is,
in memory we allocated via malloc.
And that seems a little suspicious too.
So, what are some of the reasons why we
might actually allocate that memory?
Well, one thing is we could just have
really big data structures.
We could be allocating two megabytes of
data structures because we want them.
A second thing is that we
could be caching things.
Even though we don't need them,
we're actually saving them just
in case we need them again.
And a third case is that we could
actually be creating things and
just forgetting to destroy them.
And there's a huge
amount of other things.
But the problem is
that with any of these,
the more memory you allocate via malloc,
basically the system will just
keep giving you the memory.
And eventually what happens is the
system grows to the point where it
won't fit in physical memory anymore.
You start thrashing,
or you start swapping stuff out to disk,
and as a result your system slows down.
So there's two tools I'm going to
show you that will help you track
down why memory is being allocated.
The first one's called malloc_debug,
and it tries to show you via a call
graph where memory is allocated so that
you can track down the big allocations.
The second one called object_alloc
tries to refer to things according
to how many objects exist.
So we'll start off with malloc-debug.
And Scott can bring that up.
What we do with malloc-debug is we select
an application and we can launch it.
and Scott can connect and say okay
I want to look at the dock and
we get our little thread viewer
And now Scott can go back to
malloc-debug and hit the update button.
And we find out that to get
to that point in the code,
we needed 2.6 megabytes of memory.
Now, ThreadViewer isn't that complex,
so this seems a little suspicious to me.
Now, like I said,
malloc-debug works off a call graph.
So what it's doing is it's showing the
various functions that were called.
So for example,
Scott can start clicking on start,
which is a secret
function in the runtime,
which you don't need to know about.
But start at main.
Okay, so main is the top of our program.
And the number to the side of that,
the 1.3 megabytes,
represents the amount of memory
allocated by main and everything below
it by all the functions it calls.
The rest of the memory is
allocated on a different thread
that isn't started at main.
That's why you don't see it.
and what we can see is to the right
of main 1.3 megabytes of memory was
allocated in NS application main
and 10,000 bytes was allocated in
calls to allocate unneeded buffer.
Both of these were called
directly by main and if you went
to the source code you see that.
Okay, NS Application Main.
You don't need to worry about
that because that is the
root of the Cocoa framework,
and that's how you get it started.
So of course there's going to
be a lot of memory allocated.
The Call to Allocate Unneeded Buffer,
which calls malloc,
allocates a single 10,000 byte buffer.
Scott can look at the listing
below where it shows the buffers,
double click on it, and get a hex dump.
And we can find out that that buffer,
we can look at the buffer and maybe
we can detect what the cause is.
And it has a string that says
this buffer isn't really needed.
Okay, so that's obviously a
buffer we can get rid of.
I think.
But this shows you how you can
walk through the call graph and you
can actually find where there are
allocations and you can say hey this
looks suspicious and try to fix it.
And if you understand how your
program is structured top down,
this makes a lot of sense.
And you can walk through the tree
looking for things that are interesting,
because this is basically sort of a scrub
your nose on the screen until you see
something interesting kind of problem.
Now the other thing that we can do is
there's times where we don't really
care how we got there from main,
but we're sort of curious
about who was calling malloc
directly to try to assign blame.
So Scott can switch the mode of
display from standard to inverted.
And this means we're looking at
the call tree from the bottom up.
So for example,
we can see here that there's 740,000
bytes allocated in calls to malloc.
and 489,000 bytes of that was
when NSZoneMalloc called malloc.
That's the Objective-C version of malloc.
And 290,000 of that was
when we called NSReadImage,
which called NSZoneMalloc,
which called malloc.
Now,
ThreadViewer is a pretty simple program.
It doesn't have any icons.
It doesn't have any pictures.
And so the idea that NSReadImage
is responsible for 290,000
bytes seems a little suspicious.
And so we can start walking up
the call graph to see who called
what to get to NSReadImage.
Now,
if we go up past all the AppKit stuff
and we can see--actually,
Scott, can you point at where the library
and the application name are?
So we can see that we end up in a
function called ImageForProcess,
which is in the ThreadViewer library.
That's what the thing
in parentheses means.
So this is my code.
And this is what's being
called to actually cause those
NS read images to be called.
Now, unfortunately I know this code
and I know what that function is.
That's the function that handles the
attached dialog box for Thread Viewer,
which Scott can bring up.
And so even though that
dialog box had been closed,
those icons were still around.
and the reason why was that basically
Thread Viewer was trying to be clever.
It decided it would be really smart
if it could cache those icons,
if it could keep them in memory
after the dialog box closed,
just on the off chance it
was going to need them again.
Now the--and that's nice.
I don't have to read them in off of disk,
they're sitting in memory.
The problem is because of virtual memory,
as soon as the application
got a little too large,
what would happen is we'd take those
pages that hadn't really been touched in
a while and we'd write them out to disk.
And so when we actually did bring
up that attached dialog box again,
well, to avoid reading the disk,
we'd go to memory,
which would require reading the disk.
Once again, the idea of saving memory is
pretty important because it's
probably going to be cheaper just
to get the stupid thing off disk.
And so the idea of caching
those icons was really stupid.
What would have been much better was
when the dialog box went away if we
just got rid of those icons and then we
recreated them on the fly the next time
we opened that dialog box because it
was a relatively infrequent occurrence.
Oh, one thing I haven't mentioned here
that I should is that everything
that you saw in malloc_debug refers
to currently allocated blocks.
So if something was
allocated and then freed,
you won't see it in malloc_debug.
So that's something to
keep in mind as you use it.
Now, malloc-debug has a number of
other features that are useful.
For example,
one of the things it can do is it can
help you identify leaks in your program,
places where you're allocating memory
and then you forget to deallocate it.
Now, these are really important to
track down because leaked memory,
stuff that you aren't--you're
forgetting to free and never free,
basically sit in memory,
they occupy space,
they keep you from having the
stuff you're using close together.
And if you have a long running
app that goes for days,
like a server app,
you're memory just keeps
growing and growing and growing
until 30 days into the thing,
suddenly the app crashes and
you have absolutely no idea why.
So, and even if you have a small,
short app, this is still going
to affect performance.
You know,
this is a particularly strong point for
me because there's at least one game
that I've been trying to play lately
that after about four hours of playing,
it has a memory leak and eventually
it sort of runs out of memory.
And so please, if you write games,
don't do this.
So Malictabug can help us detect this.
What we can do is we can
switch from show me all things,
or show me the things that
have recently changed,
which is new.
And we can switch to
the definite leaks mode.
Show me only the buffers that aren't
referenced anywhere in memory.
The way it does that is
basically garbage collection.
It goes scanning in memory,
looking for pointers to the buffer.
and any buffer in that's been malic
that it can't find a pointer to it,
it assumes it's unreferenced.
Because if we don't have a pointer to it,
there's absolutely no way we can free it.
And we see here we have
about 10,000 bytes leaked.
And Scott can click on the malloc and see
that there's a case in image for process,
interesting,
where we're allocating a couple buffers
and we've lost the pointers to them,
so we can't free them.
I actually looked at this code.
What I'm doing here is,
when I go and read the icons, basically,
I have to make a list of-- or I have to
grab the command line to find the icons.
You don't want to know.
And I keep a buffer around
for that list of arguments.
And in most cases,
at the very end of the routine,
I actually free it.
However, in a few cases,
I would find that there was an
extraordinary situation that I knew
I wasn't going to find an icon.
And so I would basically
just exit that routine.
But I forgot to release the buffer.
No one else does this, right?
So, yeah,
this really is just one of those things
that I wanted because it helps me.
So this is another case
where MalictiBug helped us.
And in fact,
it's showing us another lesson
of software engineering,
which is if you keep finding
bugs in the same code,
maybe this means you need
to rewrite this routine.
Now there's a couple
little things to remember.
One is that you may say, oh,
you're only leaking 10,000 bytes.
Who really cares?
What's 10,000 bytes?
However, the way that malloc-debug's
leak detection algorithm works,
as you remember,
was if you can't find a pointer
to this buffer anywhere,
then it must be leaked.
This first of all means it doesn't
do well with circularly linked lists,
because everything will
have a pointer to it,
and so it'll never be linked.
Or, I mean, it'll never be leaked.
Also, that means that if you
have a tree data structure,
The root doesn't have any pointers to it,
but everything else is pointed to,
and so it's never leaked.
So every leak that you see in
malloc_debug may be important,
and so you should go track it down.
Finally,
one more thing about malloc-debug.
This doesn't necessarily
impact performance,
but it does impact correctness.
Malloc-debug can also help you
track down pointer problems.
and that's and what happens is that
uh... there's a number of bugs are really
subtle intermittent examples include
uh... cases where you free a buffer
but you continue to read and write from
it even though somebody else now has
the buffer these are miserable suddenly
data is changing you have no idea why
The second kind of bug that is really
nasty is when you have buffer overruns,
where you have, let's say,
a string that's 40 bytes long,
but you write 45 bytes into it.
And so suddenly you trash
the next thing after it.
Malik Debug can help you
track down both of these.
Excuse me, Malik Debug can help
you find both of these.
And the reason why I say help is
because what Malik Debug does is
it tries to encourage your program
to crash if it does stupid things.
What it does, and here Scott's brought
up the memory dump.
See, do we have any?
So one of the things that it
does is when you free memory,
malloc-debug carefully goes and it
erases the contents of that buffer.
And it replaces it with 55 hex.
So we would have seen a
lot of cases-- actually,
there we are-- of 55555555.
So if you try to read data from
this buffer that you've freed,
you'll get garbage.
And hopefully,
you'll crash or you'll behave badly.
If you try to treat those as pointers,
it's even better because 55, 55, 55,
55 is almost always unallocated memory.
And as soon as you touch it,
basically your app crashes.
So if your application ever
crashes in malloc debug,
it's trying to tell you something.
Hook up with a debugger.
There's instructions in malloc
debug to tell you how to
track down these kind of bugs.
And find the pointer problem,
because it'll save you
a lot of grief later.
The other thing that Malik
Debug does is it puts guard
words on each end of a buffer.
At the beginning of the buffer
it puts the string dead beef,
the first part that's highlighted.
So D-E-A-D-B-E-E-F.
Then you have the buffer and then at
the end you have the thing beef dead.
I did not make this up.
It just came this way.
And what will happen is that
if you overrun the buffer,
Malictabug checks occasionally on
freeze to see whether anything happens.
And if it ever finds that
those bytes have been changed,
what it will do is it will
actually print out a warning.
Unfortunately,
the warning goes out to the console,
so please keep the console open
while you're running Malictabug.
Yes, this is lame.
We're working on it.
We'll try to do something about it.
Okay, thanks for that Scott.
The second tool I'll show you is called
ObjectAlloc and it's intended for helping
you understand how many objects you have
rather than where they were allocated.
Specifically,
it's mostly useful if you're
doing Objective C work or if
you're doing core foundation.
What we can do is again
select an application.
In this case it doesn't
understand bundles.
and we can start the program
running and what happens is it
gives us a little histogram.
It shows us a bunch of numbers
grouped by the type of object and
these little histograms for showing
how many objects we've created.
The first number and the darkest
bar represent the current
number of objects that exist.
The second bar represents the peak
number of objects of that type
that were created during the run.
Okay, so the peak number that
ever existed at one time.
The final bar, the lightest color,
represents the total number
of objects of that type.
Now, this way of organizing things is
really nice for certain types of tasks.
For example,
Well actually,
let me mention one other thing.
One thing that it's good
for is identifying trends.
So we can see motion here,
we can watch the numbers growing,
and so it's very nice for seeing
that memory use is expanding,
for example.
A second thing is it can help us
when we're trying to prove various
statements about our program.
So, for example,
the thread viewer display basically
keeps sampling the application,
finding out information about
how it's currently running,
and throws those on the
right-hand side of the display.
The information that scrolls
off the left disappears.
And the way that's done is with a
data structure called a thread data.
And what happens is the new
thread data gets put on the
right side of a big array,
and when the information becomes out
of date because it's scrolled off,
they get thrown off
on the left-hand side,
and hopefully the objects are destroyed.
So one bug I could really imagine
doing is that I could be forgetting
to delete them correctly,
resulting in the number of thread
data is growing without bounds,
and eventually my system
performance would degrade.
So we can prove that,
and Scott has actually done this.
We can actually click,
we can find thread data in
Object Alex display and see
how many objects we have.
And what we see here is that the current
number of thread data objects varies.
It goes between about 45 and 55.
The peak number was 62,
but we noticed that the total
number is about 1,400 and growing.
So this implies to me that
I actually did this correctly.
So this isn't a bug.
We're keeping the correct number of
objects in sort of our ring buffer,
throwing new items on the right-hand
side and pulling objects off the left.
So Object Alex has been
able to help us prove that.
One other thing, how many of you are
Objective-C programmers or are interested
in being Objective-C programmers?
Okay, as you do test code,
make sure you use ObjectAlloc because one
of the things that it's really great at,
that you may have seen when we
actually brought up the attach panel,
is that you can tell it to keep track
of every single time that you retain
or you release a data structure.
Basically Objective-C has reference
counting and it only deletes the object
when you haven't retained it anymore.
And so if you have a program,
you can figure out whether you're
actually destroying objects
correctly and if you're not,
you can find out when you
retained it one too many times
to keep it around in memory.
So use ObjectAlloc,
especially on the example code.
Thank you, Scott.
OK, so that's memory.
The third case of performance
we might try to track down
is what code is executing.
Now, there's a number of ways that
we could be using too much CPU.
We could be executing code
that we don't need to,
either that it's dead code or that it
somehow is not really doing a value
that--calculating a value we care about.
We could have an algorithm that's much
more expensive than we ever expected,
something that's let's say a quadratic,
you know, an N squared algorithm
rather than linear.
We could have cases where there's
some operation that's much
more expensive than we thought.
One example that was pointed out in
the Carbon performance session was
that now that we have home directories
that could be out on an NFS server,
when you go and get your preferences,
you might be going across the network.
And so something that may have been a
really quick grab that from the disk
kind of operation suddenly may take
seconds to actually get a result back.
and so you may not have expected
that certain operations would be
as time consuming as they are.
As you may have seen in Avi's keynote,
there's also the problem that you may
be checking for events by polling,
by constantly checking and
seeing where the mouse is,
for example,
rather than waiting for something
to happen and having the system say,
"Hey, by the way, something changed."
In general, the normal way that you solve
this kind of problem is basically
track down the biggest problem,
track down the most expensive routine,
because if you can cut the
CPU cost of that biggest routine,
if you can make it faster,
you're going to improve the
performance of your system as a whole.
So don't try doing the little things,
try doing the big things first.
So what we'll do is if we want
to try to improve performance,
what we want to do is
find the expensive calls,
improve them.
The tool for doing this,
or at least one of them,
is called Sampler,
which Scott has just brought up.
So with Sampler,
we can select an application or we can
connect to something that already exists.
And what we can do after running
it is start sampling that.
And what sampling means is that
we stop the program occasionally
and ask what's going on.
So every 20 milliseconds we
stop the program and we say,
"Where are you executing?" And we
get basically a stack backtrace.
Then we let the program continue,
stop it again, get another backtrace,
and keep going.
And the advantage of this is
that for relatively little
impact on the running system,
we can actually find out what
code is most likely to be running.
This is statistical.
We don't know all the
things that ran in between,
but we've got some good idea of
what we were actually seeing.
So what Scott, I believe,
has done is he's actually done some
sampling while ThreadViewer is drawing.
So let's see if we can find out what
ThreadViewer is doing when it's running.
Personally, I'm very concerned about how
much time it's taking to actually
grab its samples to find out
what's running in ThreadViewer.
And I want to find out how much time
ThreadViewer is spending drawing.
Now, I know a little about this program.
I know that thread 3 happens
to be where the data gathering
goes on in Thread Viewer.
And we see that thread 3 was
found executing 486 times.
That's the number of
samples that were taken.
All of those samples occurred
in the function pthreadbody,
which was calling sample threads,
which is my code.
And every time that we
stopped sample thread,
we found one of two things.
470 of the times we found
ourselves in uSleep,
which is a way of basically
stopping for a few microseconds
to wait for something to happen,
or actually wait for a fixed time.
In 16 of the times we
stopped it out of 476 though,
we found ourselves in this function
called Thread Viewer Controller.
log, which happens to be the code that
actually does the logging that gets
the information for Thread Viewer.
and if we look at that we find on the
far right a sample stack and we find out
that most of the time was actually doing
what's called sample once all threads
which is getting the stack backtrace
which ThreadViewer can actually display.
So what's happening here is that we
found that basically about 4% of the
time that we actually looked at thread 3,
it was actually doing something.
It was actually gathering data and the
rest of the time it was doing nothing.
This seems pretty good.
This means that the data gathering
is relatively cheap and that's
really good for a performance tool.
So Scott can actually just sort of
ignore all that because it doesn't look
like there's a performance problem.
We'll prune that out of the tree
so we don't have to look at it.
And now we can look at thread zero,
which is the main thread
where the drawing goes on.
and there were about seven hundred and
twenty times that there was sampling or
that we sampled the main thread and most
of the time it was in Maine which is not
surprising and then it goes down into
this DPS next event and the block until
next event is basically sitting in the
run loop it's not really doing very much
So we can see here that 570 out of the
720 times we were sitting in CFRunLoop.
OK, so this is kind of interesting.
So 572 samples.
552 of the times that we found
ourselves in CFRunLoop run,
we were actually in a
function called Mach message.
Geez, why are we spending so
much time in Mach message?
I'll give you a hint.
That actually happens
to be a kernel routine.
So obviously there's something wrong with
the kernel because we're just sitting
there in Mach message all the time.
Actually,
does anybody know what's going on there?
Thank you very much.
We are waiting for a Mach message.
Okay, so Mach message is basically
saying--sending off a message,
probably sending it off to
like the Windows server or to
whoever's giving us events saying,
"Hey,
let me know when something actually--that
I actually care about happens,
like the mouse moves or we need to
do a redraw." And so most of the
time we're going to find ourselves
in Mach message overwrite trap.
Please do not open a bug
against the kernel saying,
"Hey, you guys, I keep finding my code
running in here." Okay,
that's why you see
Mach message overwrite trap.
The rest of the time, however,
we find ourselves in CF run loop and
if we look up the sample stack and
look for where the numbering changes,
where the tree diverges, so to speak,
we find ourselves eventually
in thread view draw rect.
And we find that only in 17
out of those 700 samples,
okay, once again,
maybe 3 or 4% of the time,
we found ourselves in
thread view draw rect,
which is actually the thing
for doing the drawing.
and ten of the times that we
sampled it and found it in DrawRect,
we found it doing some NSString drawing,
and the rest of the time we
found it drawing rectangles.
So this implies that the drawing
code is pretty efficient too,
though we weren't spending
very much time doing it.
And this suggests that if I wanted to up
the redraw speed so that Thread Viewer
wasn't just sort of flashing the screen
every second redrawing the display,
I could probably make that
animation much better.
So that's a good thing to know.
Okay, so we didn't find a bug,
but we learned something about
how we're actually going,
how we could improve this application.
So one other thing, as I said,
this is sampling.
There are a few other
tools for helping you out.
There's a tool called Sample which
gives you similar data that's a command
line tool that's really good for
finding out why the machine is hanging,
for example,
or why an application is stuck in a loop.
You can actually run Sample
and get a stack back trace.
The other tool that you may
want to know about is GPROF.
That's the standard Unix profiler.
We actually have that on our system.
It generates a text report saying
here's the code that's running.
If you want slightly more accurate data,
GPROF is a better way to go.
However, it requires you to
recompile your program.
Sampler, malloc-debug,
and the others don't require
you to do recompiles and so
they're much easier to use.
Now another way that we could be
having performance problems is
if we're using the disk badly.
That is, if we are trying to read the
disk at the wrong time and so on.
In the Carbon session they actually
went through how important it was
not to try to do disk accesses,
for example,
when you're doing drawing because
of the possibility of blocking
and slowing down your drawing.
And also to minimize the amount
of reads and writes you do during
application launch to try to make the
application launch as fast as possible.
So one thing we can imagine
is trying to understand how
the application uses the disk,
what files it tries to access.
Now, luckily there's a really cool tool
that will actually help us with this.
It's also a command line
tool and it's called fsusage.
and what FS Usage does is it basically
dumps out a text report for a given
process and it actually tells us every
single file system call that we do,
every open and close and read and
write and get DER entries and the like.
Now it has to be run as root because
it's actually a security hole because
you can in theory find out what
other people are doing with it.
Remember this is the fun of
multi-user operating systems.
and Scott did not expose his password
unlike me in a previous demo.
And what we get is we can say fs
usage for thread viewer and we can
see the reads and writes and in fact
we can find the name of the file,
we can find in the far right
column the amount of time it took.
Now, this is a relatively boring example,
but you can imagine if you ran this,
for example,
on simple text-- and actually,
that's a take home-- a bit
of homework for you all.
Go home, try running FS usage on
simple text when it starts up,
and watch what file system accesses it
does to go and get the list of fonts
and get the resources and the like,
and you'll be surprised.
So what we can see here though,
if we get back to my problem,
is we find that Thread Viewer is
every second doing an open Fstat,
a write, and a close.
And all of these are taking
less than a millisecond.
They're taking like two ten
thousandths of a second to do,
according to the numbers
on the far right.
But this seems a little wrong to me.
And we can see the file that we're
doing is /temp/threadviewer-log.
And we could actually go and look
at that file if we needed to to try
to understand what was going on.
Actually, don't worry about that.
So, so,
Fs usage has shown us that Thread Viewer
is doing something really brain dead.
So the question is,
where is that brain deadness in my code?
And fsusage doesn't tell us that.
Luckily, Sampler has a mode that will
actually help us on this problem.
Rather than just doing CPU sampling,
Sampler will let us do
several other things.
It has a mode that helps
us track down mallocs,
which is very similar to malloc debug.
It also has a mode called
Watch for File Actions,
which will, instead of stopping the
program and getting a stack
backtrace every 50 milliseconds,
it will do that every time you call
one of the system file routines.
or it will crash.
Let's try that again.
Did we kill the doc?
Oh good now.
So one of the problems with Thread Viewer
is because it's a performance tool,
and because we're running it,
it has this tendency to stop applications
when it's looking at them so that it
can snarf their memory and the like.
And one of the problems with demoing it,
which--
I'm not sure why I was
silly enough to do that,
is that if ThreadViewer manages to
crash when it has stopped the program,
there's this nasty habit that
suddenly the dock is hung,
which makes for really good demos
because suddenly you're trying
desperately to get the system back.
Luckily this didn't happen.
Okay, so Scott's got this up and can
basically run the program in Sampler
for a while and then can hit update
and can get a list of all the
places where allocations occurred.
Here we get the normal call
tree starting at the root,
starting at main.
It's a little more interesting to go
with the invert call tree option here.
And here we can see that there
were 380 places where we did read,
372 where we did L-seq,
128 opens and the like.
And so I think we were
doing opens and writes.
So let's click on open and we
see that of those 128 opens,
we see a number in
CF read byte and the like.
The one that's probably interesting
is the F open call there.
Okay.
is that it?
Yes, which happens to be in the
ThreadView controller get sample array.
And what's happening here is
that in my code for gathering
the information on the thread,
for some really silly reason,
I put in basically a
little loop that said,
I think I've got that,
something like this.
Open this file,
write out the samples to the disk,
close the file.
Okay?
And because I'm doing this every second,
that's relatively inefficient.
It didn't affect ThreadViewer,
but you can imagine if
you had this in your code,
you might want to know about the
fact that you were opening and
closing the same file a lot of times.
It might be more efficient if I'd
done something like just open the
file once and then just kept writing
to it every time I needed data.
Or I could just yank this code out,
because it's actually
pointless in this program.
Okay, so you've seen two ways
that you can use Sampler,
both to stop the program occasionally
to find out what code's executing,
and you've seen another of
the cool features of Sampler,
which is to look at file system accesses.
The final type of problem I'm
going to tell you about is drawing.
Because all of our applications
are graphics based,
all the good ones that we do,
Most of the good ones we do.
Drawing is very important because
it's how we communicate with the user.
All the value of the Macintosh
is basically presenting things
to users in graphical ways so
that they can understand things,
so that they can do the creative work and
let the computer do all the boring stuff.
And so drawing is a key issue,
and you want the drawing to
be as efficient as possible
so your application runs well.
The problem is that if
you do too much drawing,
you're going to use CPU time,
you're going to use memory
because you've got buffers,
you're going to be using
Mach messages as we saw to
communicate with the window manager,
which means we'll be blocking.
And so too much drawing will
cause a lot of blocking.
It will be too much work.
And so we want to minimize that.
So what we can do is there's a really
cool tool done by the Core Graphics team.
It's called Quartz Debug.
and Scott will first bring
up Thread Viewer again,
our sacrificial victim.
And Quartz Debug has
a number of features.
The two I'll show you, first of all,
it has this option called
Flash Screen Update.
And what Flash Screen Update is,
anytime that it has to redraw
any part of the screen,
Quartz Debug tells the Windows server
to actually color that in yellow.
And so that makes the
amount of drawing explicit.
So you can actually see what
goes on in the You know,
we actually do a lot of work there.
So that's really cool.
And so if you had some case where,
let's say,
during the same drawing cycle you
were redrawing the same thing twice,
this would be a way to tell.
Another thing it points out is that
the way that I handle the drawing
in Thread Viewer is that I just
erase the entire portion that I'm
animating and redraw the entire thing.
Maybe it would be more efficient
if I actually just redrew the
parts that changed every time
that I got some new samples.
Oh, oh, there's a really cool feature
here I forgot to show you.
One of the things that you can do with
Thread Viewer is that if the program
has something interesting there,
you don't want it scrolling off the left.
And I don't have history because
I've forgotten to add that.
So what you can do is you
can press that pause button.
And the pause button stops the
application that I'm looking at,
in this case the doc.
And it also stops the sampling
because the program's not running
so I don't need to gather any data.
Uh-oh.
However,
someone wasn't very bright and when
he implemented the pause button,
although he pauses the sampling,
or the thread data gathering,
He didn't bother to stop the display.
And so the display that was on a timer so
that every second it would cause a redraw
gets redrawn every single second.
And so this is a bug that
would be extremely hard to
track down in any other way.
It would be very hard to see that
when you hit the pause button,
this happens.
And if you're using a tool like Sampler,
[Transcript missing]
and so this alone is a wonderful feature.
Now another feature in Quartz Debug
is what's called Show Window List.
And this tells you what the
window manager thinks all the
windows it knows about are.
And as we can see,
there are actually about six windows
that are part of Quartz Debug,
even though only once on the screen.
So ThreadViewer actually
has six windows open.
Some of them are off screen,
some are actually--one is appearing.
And the problem is that every
single window we create,
whether it's an off screen window,
whether in this case some of
those are actually windows that
we created via interface builder
that are just not appearing
until we actually bring them up,
all those windows need to have
space in the window manager.
And so they occupy memory and
thus contribute to our memory
footprint and contribute to the
chance we might be swapping.
Once again,
this is something you may not know.
You might not realize how many
windows you actually create.
And therefore,
Quartz Debug actually gives
us a way to find that out.
And it tells us exactly how
many windows we've created.
And so now I could go in and
I could try finding out exactly
which of each of those windows was.
And in the case of dialog boxes,
make sure I only create them
when I actually need them,
as opposed to keeping
them up all the time.
Okay,
I didn't go through all the tools today.
There were a couple that you
may want to examine on your own.
The first one is called SC Usage.
It's somewhat like FS Usage,
only it looks at some
of the system calls,
like get time of day or Mach message,
and it'll tell you how many
calls you're making to that.
And you may find some
interesting behavior that you
didn't expect in your system.
Secondly, there were a number of tools
I didn't mention about heap use.
So, for example,
we saw a little about heap,
but the idea of being able to get
basically a text output describing
all the buffers you've allocated
may be interesting to you,
and so that may be useful.
There's also a command
line tool called Leaks,
which is like the leak
detection in malloc_debug.
Its leak detection algorithm is actually
a bit better than malloc_debug's.
It'll actually find any buffers that
aren't referenced from things that
are reachable from well-known spots,
so to speak.
It'll only find things--it'll
actually find groups of data
structures that are leaked,
and so it's actually more useful.
There's also a tool
called malloc_history,
which I mentioned earlier,
that will actually help you
identify for a given allocation,
for a given address, like, you know,
0xE1C04, who is responsible for that,
who actually allocated that block.
So if you're in the debugger and
you find something interesting,
you could actually look at that.
There are also a couple
tools for understanding how
your application is running.
So we saw Sampler.
Sampler is the command line equivalent.
And we had a quick
introduction to VM Map,
which is useful for understanding
how virtual memory is laid
out in your application.
If you're coming over from the 9 side,
everything is completely different and
it may be interesting to actually look at
that and realize how memory is laid out.
As I said before,
I was really trying to just tease
you saying these are the cool tools.
There are a number of hints
that I should stress again
or stress for the first time.
The first one is that all these
tools have a very nice property,
which is that you don't
need to recompile your code,
you don't need to instrument it,
you just run the tools and they work.
This makes them much more available.
It's very easy to just sort of
go in and look at your own app,
look at other people's apps.
You know,
if you're curious about how some of
Apple's own applications do disk stuff,
you can actually use some of
these tools to find out how
they're accessing the disk.
So that's a big advantage.
Take advantage of it.
Second,
if you're coming--if you're working
on Code Warrior and you're using
CFM binaries as your output so
that you can work on 9 and 10,
you need to do a little work to
actually get the performance tools
to find information in the program,
to get the symbolic information.
First of all, you need to make sure that
you compile your code with the
inline traceback table option on.
This is part of the code
generation settings.
And basically this says put
the name of the function.
Excuse me,
put the name of the function immediately
after the code in the binary.
Second, Code Warrior gives you the chance
to actually use its version
of malloc instead of using the
system's version of malloc.
If you use the Code Warrior version,
basically it asks malloc for
a huge buffer and then it
subdivides it and hands it out.
If you do that,
then tools like malloc debug, heap,
leaks, and the like won't be able to
help you with memory analysis.
So make sure that you
actually turn on that option.
And unfortunately,
I'm not quite sure exactly where it is.
Third, Object ALEC, although a nice tool,
does have the problem that it
doesn't understand what CFM apps are,
which is probably not that big a
deal because it really understands
core foundation and Objective C only.
However, if you want to look at it and
at least see how many objects
of malloc size 20 you have,
which it will tell you,
you need to actually select the
Launch CFM app hidden in the system
folder and then make sure that
you actually name the application
you're running on the command line,
just as if you were trying to to run
the application from the command line.
Okay,
so that's my presentation for today.
As I said, in two months you're about to
hopefully all ship your apps at
Macworld New York and you want to
make sure that you give the best
impression to your customers.
So start tuning your code.
The primary thing you want to do
is cut memory use in all ways.
That's going to be the best way to
actually make your programs efficient.
And so take a look at heap,
take a look at how you're using the heap,
take a look at how you're using memory,
take a look at your private memory use.
Also remember that just looking
at the program in isolation
isn't going to be useful.
Make sure to write down some metrics.
Measure how much memory you're using.
Measure how long common operations take.
Decide whether those are appropriate
and then compare them across multiple
builds so you can note regressions.
Also remember that your application
is not just your binary,
but it's also some of the
servers that you connect to.
And so make sure in the case of
drawing to look at both the window
manager and at your application.
And go out there and please
create some great apps.
And I'll be looking forward
to seeing them at Macworld.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Scott.
Damn, I forgot I got a slide.
If you want more information
about these tools,
first of all they're all available
on the Developer Tools CD.
You've all got a copy of it,
go off and play with them.
If you want documentation,
all the graphical applications
have documentation built in.
All the command line tools have man pages
online as standard Unix tools should.
There is also documentation
in the release notes section.
As I mentioned before,
there are also books to help you.
Inside Mac OS X Performance is a
really cool book that talks about
how to tune your application.
It gives you information from
the level of how the system
works to documenting the tools.
And all of us engineers actually
tried to contribute to this.
Also,
there's a Mac OS X system overview book,
and this is really good for
understanding just sort of the
overall ideas behind Mac OS X.
And we try to suggest that people
actually look at this so that they
understand some of the terminology.
And with that,
I will turn it over to Godfrey.
Thank you very much Robert and Scott.
So, last session of the day.
Information resources we put up in
all of our other tool sessions and the
information remains pretty much the same.
So a roadmap.
We wanted to point you
to sessions 121 and 122,
even though they've already occurred,
so that when you go to the DVDs
that you'll receive after the show,
you'll see some other areas where
we talk about performance tuning.
Tomorrow, our last sessions for the tools
track happen in Hall 2 at 9 a.m.
That's the debugging of
Mac OS X and the feedback forum for
Apple developer tools at 3.30 p.m.
in J1.
Please attend.
We're very interested to hear your
feedback at the end of the day.
If you have questions on tools,
you can contact me.
I am the Technology Manager for
Development Tools.
That's my information up above.
And the Developer Tools Feedback at
macos10toolsfeedbackgroup.apple.com.